.TH SPARE 1 "2026-05-26" "spare v5.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
spare \- SParse Archive RElay, archiver with sparse file and streaming support
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spare
[\fIFLAGS\fR]
.I action
.I archive
[\fIfile\fR ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B spare
creates and extracts SPA archives.
SPA is a flat binary format: each file is stored as a fixed-size header
followed by the filename, an optional hole map, and the file data.
.PP
With the
.B \-S
flag, spare uses
.BR SEEK_HOLE / SEEK_DATA
to locate zero regions during packing and records them as holes rather than
storing the zero bytes.
On unpack, holes are restored.
.PP
Archives can optionally be compressed with
.BR zstd (1)
using the
.B pz
action, producing a
.B .szt
file.
spare auto-detects the format on read, so a separate flag is not needed for
unpacking.
.PP
Use
.B \-
as the archive path to read from stdin or write to stdout.
.SH ACTIONS
.TP
.B p
Pack one or more files or directories into a new SPA archive.
Directories are packed recursively; the stored path is the path as given on
the command line, including all subdirectory components.
.TP
.B pz
Pack and compress.
Same as
.BR p ,
but the resulting archive is compressed with
.BR zstd (1)
and written as a
.B .szt
file (a valid zstd stream).
.TP
.B u
Unpack a
.B .spa
or
.B .szt
archive.
spare auto-detects the format from the file header.
Permissions, timestamps, uid/gid, and symlinks are restored.
.TP
.B l
List the contents of a
.B .spa
or
.B .szt
archive, one filename per line.
.TP
.B g
Grab (extract) specific files from an archive without unpacking everything.
Each
.I file
argument is matched as a substring of the stored path.
.TP
.B i
Insert files into an existing archive.
For
.B .spa
archives the new entries are appended; for
.B .szt
archives the archive is decompressed, appended to, and re-compressed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Print a short usage summary and exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Print the version string and exit.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose output.
For
.BR p / pz ,
prints one line per packed file showing the byte breakdown:
header + filename + hole map + body.
Silently disabled when writing to stdout
.RB ( archive = \- ).
.TP
.BI \-j\  N
Use
.I N
worker threads for packing and compression.
If
.I N
is omitted, defaults to the number of online CPU cores
.RB ( _SC_NPROCESSORS_ONLN ).
.TP
.B \-z
When the archive path is
.BR \- ,
treat stdin as a compressed SZT stream.
Without this flag spare assumes an uncompressed SAR stream from stdin.
.TP
.B \-S
Detect and preserve sparse holes during packing.
Holes are recorded in the archive and punched back on
.BR u .
Falls back to storing the full file on filesystems that do not support
.BR SEEK_HOLE .
.TP
.BI \-C\  dir
Extract files into
.I dir
instead of the current directory.
The archive path is resolved to an absolute path before the
.BR chdir (2)
so relative archive paths still work.
.SH ARCHIVE FORMAT
SPA archives are a concatenation of self-describing blocks, one per file:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[ FileHeader(58 B) | filename[name_len] | HoleEntry[hole_count] | data[stored_size] ] \fR...
.fi
.RE
.PP
The fixed-size header is 58 bytes, packed with no padding.
It is followed immediately by
.I name_len
bytes of the stored file path, then
.I hole_count
.B HoleEntry
structs (16 bytes each), then
.I stored_size
bytes of file data.
.PP
Every block carries an
.B xxh64
checksum over the header (checksum field zeroed), filename bytes, hole map,
and file data.
Corruption in filenames, permissions, timestamps, hole maps, or file contents
is detected on unpack.
.PP
Compressed archives
.RB ( .szt )
are a standard zstd stream wrapping the entire SPA archive and are readable by
.B "zstd \-d"
without spare.
.SH STDIN \/ STDOUT PIPING
Use
.B \-
as the archive path for streaming operation:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
# Copy a directory tree to a remote host without a temporary file
spare p  \- src/ | ssh user@host "spare u \-"

# Checksum an archive without writing it to disk
spare p  \- file1 file2 | sha256sum

# Stream a compressed archive to object storage
spare pz \- src/ | aws s3 cp \- s3://bucket/backup.szt

# Decrypt and unpack in one step
gpg \-d secrets.szt | spare u \- \-z
.fi
.RE
.PP
Disk usage per operation when using
.BR \- :
.TP
.BR "spare p \-" " (single-threaded)"
Zero, writes directly to stdout.
.TP
.BR "spare u \-" " (uncompressed)"
Zero, reads directly from stdin.
.TP
.BR "spare p \- \-j N"
Writes
.B spare.tmp
- multithreaded packing requires
.BR mmap (2),
which needs a seekable file.
.TP
.BR "spare pz \-"
Writes
.B spare.tmp
- the entire archive must exist before compression begins.
.TP
.BR "spare u \- \-z"
Writes
.B spare.tmp
- the decompressor requires a seekable path.
.TP
.BR "spare l \- \-z" , " spare g \- \-z"
Writes
.BR spare.tmp " and " spare_stdin.tmp
- list/grab require seekable access; stdin is also buffered.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Packing and unpacking
.nf
# Pack a directory
spare p backup.spa /etc /home/alice

# Pack with zstd compression, using 8 threads
spare \-j8 pz backup.szt /var/lib/postgresql

# Unpack into /restore
spare \-C /restore u backup.spa

# List contents
spare l backup.szt
.fi
.SS Sparse VM images
.nf
# Pack a raw QEMU disk image, preserving holes (-S)
spare \-S p vm.spa /var/lib/libvirt/images/debian.raw

# Unpack and restore holes
spare \-S u vm.spa
.fi
.SS Selective extraction
.nf
# Extract only files whose stored path contains "passwd" or "shadow"
spare g backup.spa passwd shadow

# Grab from a compressed archive
spare g system.szt etc/ssh/sshd_config
.fi
.SS Pipelines and remote copy
.nf
# Live backup to S3 without a local temp file
spare p \- /data | aws s3 cp \- s3://my-bucket/data.spa

# Pull files from a remote host
ssh user@host "spare p \- /etc" | spare u \-
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (malformed arguments, I/O failure, corrupt archive, etc.).
.SH TEMP FILES
spare may create the following temporary files in the \fIcurrent working directory\fR:
.TP
.B spare.tmp
Used when packing requires an on-disk intermediate archive (multithreaded
packing to stdout, or
.B pz
).
.TP
.B spare_stdin.tmp
Used to buffer stdin when the operation requires a seekable file
.RB ( l " or " g
with a compressed stream on stdin).
.PP
Both files are removed on successful completion.
On
.B SIGINT
or
.BR SIGTERM ,
a signal handler removes any existing temp files before re-raising the signal
so the shell receives the correct exit status.
.SH NOTES
.SS Sparse file support
Sparse detection and restoration is a Linux-specific feature that relies on
.B SEEK_HOLE
.RB ( lseek (2))
and
.B FALLOC_FL_PUNCH_HOLE
.RB ( fallocate (2)).
On filesystems or kernels that do not support these interfaces, spare falls
back to storing and restoring files without hole optimisation.
.SS Checksum algorithm
spare uses
.B xxHash XXH64
for per-file checksums.
The checksum covers the fixed header (with the checksum field zeroed), the
variable-length filename, the hole map, and the stored file data.
Checksums are verified on unpack and list; mismatches abort extraction with
an error message.
.SS Format version
This man page documents format version
.BR 5 .
Archives produced by earlier versions of spare are not compatible.
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B zstd
Required at link time for compression/decompression.
.TP
.B xxhash
Header-only library; included at compile time, no linking required.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tar (1),
.BR zstd (1),
.BR fallocate (2),
.BR lseek (2)
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Iván Naranjo Ortega.